Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in our last video
we started introducing some basic combinatorial
objects lists ordered sets multi sets and sets
today we're going to have a little bit of fun
playing around with first of all lists we're
going to go through these various types and
see what kinds of mathematical things we can do
in terms of exploration this is a kind of a fun
activity and it's instructive perhaps for those
of you are amateur would-be mathematicians how
we might approach a subject how we might start
about setting out definitions preliminary kind
of frameworks for investigations and what kinds
of questions and structure we look for when we're
developing mathematical theories so it's a little
bit open-ended and we'll see what kinds of fun
things we can find okay so let me remind you about
these very concrete specific and tangible kinds of
data structures we were talking about so in terms
of lists we defined a type list m'kay which are
objects of this kind we say AK a list from n so
it's a sequence of natural numbers each natural
number is between 1 and n that's our range of
possible elements and here they're in sequence
order matters separated by commas and enclosed
in square brackets the ordered sets were very
similar except that there were curly brackets or
braces with the condition that these elements have
to all be distinct a multiset or an M set was
a lot like this closed in square brackets but
without any commas just spaces in between the
elements which suggest us that they are per
mutable so the order doesn't matter we can switch
the order of these elements and the set where the
multiset stays the same and finally the perhaps
more familiar data structure of a set which has
some novel new notation because we no longer use
commas but just spaces to separate the elements
reminding us that the elements can be per muted
around freely and the set doesn't change but as
in this order set business we insist that the
elements all be distinct okay so for example
here is element in list five six so it's a six
list from five all the entries are between one
and five and there's six of them and they're
in order closed in square brackets and there's
multiplicities possible we have two fives and
two twos here's an ordered set and there's only
one of every element so this is a two oh set from
twelve here we have a multiset a5m set from for
the elements are all between one and four and this
five limit order doesn't matter we can permute the
entries and here we have a set again order doesn't
matter because there are no commas but they all
have to be distinct because of the curly brackets
or braces so this is a three set from eighteen
all right so we've got the definitions of these
various kinds of objects now we want to explore
a little bit about the beginnings of list theory
ordered set theory multi set theory and set theory
you will see that there are similarities but
there are also interesting differences between
these various theories all sitting inside the
larger system of data structures it is all a
branch of combinatorics really and has quite a
lot of clothes natural connections with computer
science so the first thing on the agenda today
is to extend just a little bit our definitions
to include empty objects so empty lists empty
ordered sets empty multi sets or empty sets so
that's really the case when we allow our K in K
set or K list or whatever to also extend to the
value 0 so we'll denote 0 added to the natural
numbers by this type gnat with a little plus on
on top so we can talk about lists and 0 so a 0 set
from N and we'll denote that by a pair of brackets
with just nothing inside or perhaps a space to
make it look sort of ice and the same object can
be viewed as the empty multi set so the zero M
set from n in terms of braces with just a space
in that's the empty ordered set or the empty set
there's not really anything to distinguish them so
here we talk about the empty list or empty multi
set and here the empty ordered set or the empty
set so now we have these types defined for n a
natural number and K an extended natural number
so including the possibility of zero a note that
there's only one K list from n if K equals zero
so if we're talking about zero lists there's
only one zero list which is this one similarly
there's only one zero ordered set there's only
one zero set there's only one zero multi set so
let's have some fun exploring aspects of these
data structures so we'll take an informal kind
of approach we're taking a beginner's mind point
of view to these things we don't have an elaborate
theory ahead of us we're going to create our own
little theory so this will be instructive in terms
of the way we proceed so this is something that
you could do too having been presented with the
definition there are certain natural things that
we can do in mathematics to start investigating
things so have a look at the kinds of things that
I do and the kinds of questions and directions and
things that I end up sort of formulating so the
first thing is to try to make things a little
bit simpler instead of looking at a great amount
of generality let's restrict ourselves a little
bit so it's more tangible and sort of computable
so instead of having a general end let's agree
on a particular value of n say N equals 5 so all
the elements that appear will be 1 of 1 2 3 4 5
these are the elements that appear in the various
structures we're going to be looking at and you
know we're using the first 5 natural numbers but
in some sense we don't really care that it's the
numbers 1 through 5 these are just convenient
sort of placeholders for five things they're
the simplest five things that we have in the
mathematical world we are not really interested
in the arithmetic improper tease of these things
we're just thinking of them as sort of fundamental
objects that we're going to use to put together in
various ways so an alternate formulation would be
to use objects ABCDE for example okay there's not
gonna be much difference or if you like you could
have some more abstract collection say a 1 a 2 a
3 a 4 a 5 which play the same role here okay what
about the K values that we're going to consider
well naturally we're going to restrict ourselves
to relatively small K values but we're not going
to have any particular fixed cutoff so we're going
to be a little bit more flexible about possible
K values so in particular K being bigger than n
in this case 5 is potentially allowed so we might
want to consider for example a multi set of this
kind 1 1 3 3 5 5 that's a sixth set from 5 so
the sort of the lengths are going to be allowed
to be a little bit longer if we feel like it but
numbers that actually end up inside are all going
to be from this little collection here okay so
we've cut things down it's reasonably manageable
so now let's have a look what actually happens so
let's begin by listing the K lists from N equals
five and it's natural to do that by starting with
the smallest values of K and working ourselves
gradually up so when K is zero there's only one
zero list which is the empty list when K equals
one there are five possible one lists the lists
one for this to the list three the list for the
list five and we're actually listing them okay
there's a natural order to these five one lists
because we have a natural order on the numbers
1 2 3 4 5 so we're listing them in a sort of a
sensible way ok now we come to K equals 2 all
the two lists well we can list them 2 1 1 1 2
1 3 1 4 1 5 and then - 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - 5 and then
3 1 3 2 3 3 3 4 3 5 4 1 4 2 4 3 4 4 4 5 5 1 5 2 5
3 5 4 5 5 so notice that we're listing them in
a sensible fashion we've thought a little bit
about how we're going to list them it's not just a
question of picking 100 say 1 3 and then another 1
maybe 2 5 and then another 1 5 1 and then sort of
randomly writing them down we want to do this in a
systematic way so that the structure of things
is most likely visible to us so we're using a
kind of counting style method here so it's not
so different from the way you count do you think
of like ones and tens this is how you count you
may augment the ones first and as far as you go
and then you start by the augmenting the tens
and so on another way of describing this would
sort of a dictionary order or lexicographical
order okay and so there are all the two lists
from five all right what about three lists from
five well that's gonna be a little bit more work
and we're not going to write them all down but
let's see start so we can see how we organize
things so one one one that would be the first one
naturally and then well will augment this last one
so one one two one one three one one four one one
five and then at the next row we've gone as far
as we can in the augmenting the last one so we go
to the next last one in augment it 1 2 1 then 1
2 2 1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 5 the next one will be 1 3 1
and so on eventually we get to 1 5 ones and then
after that so the hundredths place would kick in
it's not hundreds but it's sort of like it we'd
have 2 1 1 and we carry on it I don't mention
we'd get down to the fives and the final row
would be something like 5 5 3 eventually 5 5 4 5
5 5 and that would be the last one so we can see
what the pattern is and then it's not hard for
us to little bit understand what would happen
if K equals 4 and K equals 5 and K equals 6 and
so on so we have a reasonable understanding of
what these things actually look like that's a
good first step all right so we've made a list
of some of the smaller K lists now the next kind
of question that we often ask in mathematics is
how do two different objects relate what kinds of
relations are their natural ones between pairs of
objects well here the natural at least one natural
relation is the idea of a sub list or a super list
let me explain that so here's a for list a equals
4 1 1 2 it has two obvious three lists inside it
we could take the first three elements for one
one or the final three elements one one two but
somebody else might come along and say well what
about taking this element this element and the
final element for one two should we count this as
a three list which is also inside here hmm well
there are two such three lists whose elements
also rRNA so this same three this could also be
thought of as being this four and this one and
this two so these elements here are also found
in a but one thing that this list doesn't share
here is the notion of adjacency or successor when
we have a list like this four one one two there's
a natural notion of adjacent elements right this
four and this one are adjacent one is beside
the other this one and this one are adjacent
another pair of adjacent elements this one and
this 2 are adjacent another way of saying that
or another sort of related notion is the idea of
the successor of an element which is the next one
so the successor of four is this element one the
successor of that element one is this element one
the successor of this element one is that element
- and this - doesn't have a successor so when we
take this kind of sub list we are preserving this
adjacency relation or the successor relation these
two are adjacent in the original and they're
also adjacent in B and these two are adjacent
in the original and they're also adjacent in
B so this kind of three lists is somehow more
closely connected with the original list then
this one is alright so that motivates us to do
find a sub list of a K list a say is an L list
which consists of successive adjacent elements
of a so successive adjacent elements that means
we're going to consider B and C to be sub lists
of a but we're not going to consider D to be a
sub list of a now that's not to say that D and
a don't have a relation so maybe at some later
stage we'll come back to this and say that all
right this is not a sub list but maybe it's a weak
sub list or introduce some secondary notion that
connects this with this but sort of for our first
pass we just want to identify the most fundamental
sort of obvious relations and I think this is a
reasonable one okay so we've defined what we mean
by a sub list of a K list just going to be an L
list we're elves necessarily less than or equal
to K in particular we allow a to be a sub list
of itself okay so we've defined this notion of
when a list B is a sub list of a list a and
in this case we might say that symmetrically
a is a super list of B and we could write that
relation notationally with this new symbol kind
of a horseshoe or a you sideways so B is a sub
list of a and equivalently a is a super list of
B note that we are only going to introduce this
you think opening to the right I am NOT going to
introduce this one here because it's not really
necessary we want to express this relation of
something being a sub list of something else will
write the sub list on the left and the super list
on the right why not so for example four one one
is a sub list of four one one two or equivalently
4 one 1 2 is a super list of four one one let's
similarly 1 1 2 is a sub list of 4 1 1 2 right so
now we can investigate sort of the family of sub
lists of 4 1 1 2 notice I use the word family just
something that comes to mind one of those many
synonyms for so a group collection set menagerie
etc what kind of an object we're actually going to
get will become a parent only a little bit later
so let's just have a look at sub lists of 4 1 1 2
so here are the three lists that we've already had
a look at and inside each one of these there are
two lists so 4 1 & 1 1 these are two lists inside
here and so of course they're also inside here
and this one is also inside this one and also 1
2 is inside here there's kind of this branching
and for one has within it the sub list for the
sub list 1 this 1 1 has the sub list 1 and the
sub list 1 this one sort of being that element
and this one being that element and one two has
this one which it shares with this one over here
it also has two so here's a kind of a diagram all
the various sub lists are 4 1 1 2 with something
about the containment structure so these bonds
are kind of telling us which ones are inside
which other ones that's kind of a pleasant little
configuration nice and symmetrical and nice to
look at so suggesting that we're investigating
something that's reasonably interesting
ok so this is an example of another kind of data
structure which is a little bit more sophisticated
than the four ones that we've introduced so far
so this is what one might call a partially ordered
multi set a little bit like a partially ordered
set if you've heard of that which is a little bit
more general because for example these two objects
are actually the same okay so we're not going to
get into the theory of such things quite yet but
we're seeing that even investigating something
as simple as a list like this naturally some
additional structures are sort of appearing
and it's sort of interesting for us now there's an
additional question floating around here which is
what about the empty list should the empty list be
considered as a sub list of a list and if so where
does it fit in this little diagram so it might be
the case that we should consider the empty list
to be in each one of these and maybe there should
just be one empty list sort of at the bottom of
the diagram which is contained in all of these or
maybe we should think about this thing having two
empty list sort of one on either side and maybe
this one shared by these two so maybe it should
be a row of empty lists here we're not quite
sure the empty list is a little bit less clear
to us than these lists with real things in it so
we'll be agnostic about that and maybe just leave
question marks there maybe later on things will
become clearer for us it's important not to decide
things beforehand okay we need to let things which
are a little bit unclear stay unclear until we're
more confident about what should be done and that
can be gained by having more experience and making
more investigations and seeing how bigger and
bigger structures fit together all right so
there's nothing wrong with withholding judgment
about various things and that's what we'll do
with regard to the role of these empty lists in
this table or picture of sub lists of 4 1 1 2 all
right so what do we do next so we've defined our
K lists we've talked a little bit about relations
between K lists now another natural thing to do
is to talk about operations with Kahless how can
we put these together or combine them or do some
kind of arithmetic or algebra with them so this
is kind of a natural question that when you do
mathematics a lot in different disciplines you
see that there are certain patterns or certain
standard questions that one asks that repeat
themselves in many different kinds of situations
this is typical of that we ask now what can we
do with Kahless in terms of putting them together
now there's a kind of obvious answer so if here is
the K list for 1 1 2 K is 4 and here's another
4 list B 2 5 5 1 then we can define a new list
a plus B obtained by taking the first list taking
the second list and putting them together in kind
of the obvious concatenation fashion with a first
and B second so we get a list with 4 plus 4 or 8
elements so this 4 list together of this 4 list
gives us an 8 list now if we did it in the other
way around B plus a we would get 2 5 5 1 4 1 1
2 obviously different from this one so this is
not a commutative operation and this addition or
Computer Sciences like you called concatenation
of strings between a K list and an eldest gives
a k plus L list in general and a little exercise
for you convince yourself that the associative law
holds and if we have three that a plus B plus C is
the same as a plus B plus C and terms of the
empty list this is like the identity in this
situation if we take the empty list and added
to a it means we put nothing in front of the
elements of a we get a itself and that's the same
as taking a plus the empty list if we put nothing
at the end of the list a we still get the list
a so we have these sort of two aspects here we
have a an associative addition with an identity
element and this describes what mathematicians
like to call it Monroy yes this is an example
of a monoid and it's quite an important kind
of mono in computer science in other areas as
well so it's a relatively simple kind of thing
but it's no pleasant little so almost algebraic
kind of structure that we have with these these
lists no a slightly different thing that we could
do is we'll be might call doubling a K list so if
we start with a list for 1 1 2 we could define
its double to be 2 a which is by definition for
4 1 1 1 1 2 2 how do we get that well we just go
through each of the elements here and we double
them so instead of having a single four we have
two fours instead of the single one we have two
ones so this one we have two ones so this two
we have two twos so everything just gets sort
of doubled right where it is so the double of a K
list is obviously a 2 K list and you can convince
yourself that this doubling of a is not the same
as a plus a not the same in general at least but
it is true that if you double a plus B you get
the same thing as doubling a plus doubling B
okay so another exercise you could also
define the triple of a or the quadruple
of a in a similar kind of fashion and then you
could show that say three times four a is the
same as 12 a not just for three and four but
with any natural number kind of multiples so
here's something else that we could do with a
pair of lists we could define a different kind
of addition maybe we could call that shuffle
addition and denoted by an addition with a a
circle around it so if a is 4 1 1 2 and C is
5 2 5 then let's define a shuffle addition C
to be 4 5 1 2 1 5 2 and C shuffle some a to be 5
4 2 1 5 1 2 so this is very much like when your
rifle shuffle pack of cards you've got two piles
and then your you know on the bottom they kind
of interleaved like this right now the piles
don't have to be necessarily the same size so
once you you know finish one that this would say
finished then the rest of the bigger pile just
plots on top of what you have is nothing more to
interleave okay the shuffle addition between a K
list and L list is clearly a k plus L list and
you can convince yourself that in general this
kind of addition is no longer associative so a
shuffle zombie shuffle some C is not equal to
a shuffle some beef shuffle some to see and
you might like to think about what's a good
definition of a shuffle some B shuffle some see
where we have no brackets does that make any sense
usually these kinds of things are equal then
we would define this just to be the common
value here but since this does not equal this
then it's not clear what this should be this
so this should be this or something else and
you also might like to show that to a is a
shop with some a okay so we've introduced a few
ideas suggesting maybe some more investigations
that might be made just the beginnings of what
we might call list theory and this is with the
interest to computer scientists so very good now
next we have to think about what happens if we
change our point of view slightly to ordered sets
or to multi sets and eventually two sets what are
the differences what are the similarities what
kinds of operations and structures and such can
we find with these other ones so in my next
video we're going to have a further look if
it's more fun with these kinds of objects and
we'll look at some of the other ones and see
what we can do with them I hope you'll join me for
that,i am Norman Wildberger thanks for listening